Add proposal of structured error handling in Rust (#3)
radicle-dev/radicle-decisions: proposals/0002.md

* Title: Structured error handling in Rust
* Champion: @CodeSandwich
* Conversation (optional): [thread on radicle.community](https://radicle.community/t/proposal-structured-error-handling-in-rust/179)
* References:
  * [The previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md)
  * [`std::error::Error`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/error/trait.Error.html)
  * [A discussion about the good design of errors](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/do-people-not-care-about-printable-error-chains-a-k-a-how-to-nicely-implement-display-for-an-error/35362)

# Summary/Motivation/Introduction
We need good error handling to make our lives easier.

> We've already agreed to use `thiserror` and `anyhow`, which are fantastic tools, but we're still

Reviewer: > We've already agreed to use `thiserror` and `anyhow`

Would be nice to link to that entry.

Author: Fixed

lacking a common design language.
There are many ways to create an error and some of them don't play well with others.
Without common conventions handling errors is problematic too.

This is a guide to structuring errors well.

# Explanation

## The great `Error` unification

The ultimate goal is to make your errors as easy to integrate and handle as possible.
The canonical way of achieving this is by implementing the `std::error::Error` trait.
It's universally used in the Rust ecosystem and provides a common interface for working with
different errors coming from numerous crates.
It's not possible to enforce the exact behavior of an implementation of the `Error` trait, but
there's a widely used convention making it reasonably uniform and predictable.

## The correct behavior of an `Error` implementation

`Error` provides 2 core functionalities:

> - it provides the `source` method, which may or may not return a reference to another `Error`

Reviewer: it'd be good to explain that that "another `Error`" would be a wrapper error.

Author: At this point it doesn't have to be. This is a description of the raw interface and it will accept any behavior that will succeed to compile. If you want to return `&self`, or randomize your output, you can do it! What exactly **should** be returned is explained in the following sections.

Reviewer: Fair :+1:

> - it derives from the `Display` making all its implementors printable

Reviewer 2: It derives what from the `Display`? :)

Author: It just "derives," in the OOP sense :D `std::error::Error: Display`, which means that if you want to implement `Error` for a `struct`, it's required to implement `Display`.

Reviewer 2: Right, I was thinking there was one word missing to complete this. I'll follow up with my suggestion :)

Reviewer 2: Actually nevermind, it reads well now :+1:

[previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md).
They are fantastic tools, but we're still lacking a common design language.
There are many ways to create an error and some of them don't play well with others.
Without common conventions handling errors is problematic too.

This is a guide to structuring errors well.

# Explanation

## The great `Error` unification

The ultimate goal is to make your errors as easy to integrate and handle as possible.
The canonical way of achieving this is by implementing the `std::error::Error` trait.
It's universally used in the Rust ecosystem and provides a common interface for working with
different errors coming from numerous crates.
It's not possible to enforce the exact behavior of an implementation of the `Error` trait, but
there's a widely used convention making it reasonably uniform and predictable.

## The correct behavior of an `Error` implementation

`Error` provides 2 core functionalities:

- it provides the `source` method, which may or may not return a reference to another `Error`
- it derives from the `Display` making all its implementors printable

> ### The bevavior of the `source`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The bevavior of `source`
```

Author: Fixed

`source` should return a value when the error has another error nested inside.
The wrapped error should be the cause of the outer one, usually a bit lower level and more detailed.
The errors can be wrapped multiple times to express the whole chain of errors down to the root
cause. It can be traversed by calling `source` recursively.

For example the custom `FileLoadError` can wrap the `std::io::Error`.
This way the file loading function doesn't have to know about all the possible file system failures
described by the `std::io::Error`.
When it gets one, it simply wraps it in the `FileLoadError` and returns it.
If a higher level function is interested, what caused the `FileLoadError`, it can call its `source`
method and get its cause.

`source` should return `None` when the error is the root cause and doesn't wrap another error.
It's also impossible to return a wrapped error when it doesn't implement `Error`.

> ### The bevavior of the `Display`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The bevavior of `Display`
```

Author: Fixed

[previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md).
They are fantastic tools, but we're still lacking a common design language.
There are many ways to create an error and some of them don't play well with others.
Without common conventions handling errors is problematic too.

This is a guide to structuring errors well.

# Explanation

## The great `Error` unification

The ultimate goal is to make your errors as easy to integrate and handle as possible.
The canonical way of achieving this is by implementing the `std::error::Error` trait.
It's universally used in the Rust ecosystem and provides a common interface for working with
different errors coming from numerous crates.
It's not possible to enforce the exact behavior of an implementation of the `Error` trait, but
there's a widely used convention making it reasonably uniform and predictable.

## The correct behavior of an `Error` implementation

`Error` provides 2 core functionalities:

- it provides the `source` method, which may or may not return a reference to another
`std::error::Error`
- it derives from `Display` making all its implementors printable

> ### The bevavior of `source`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### The behavior of `source`
```

Author: Fixed

`source` should return a value when the error has another error nested inside.
The wrapped error should be the cause of the outer one, usually a bit lower level and more detailed.
The errors can be wrapped multiple times to express the whole chain of errors down to the root
cause. It can be traversed by calling `source` recursively.

For example the custom `FileLoadError` can wrap the `std::io::Error`.
This way the file loading function doesn't have to know about all the possible file system failures
described by the `std::io::Error`.
When it gets one, it simply wraps it in the `FileLoadError` and returns it.
If a higher level function is interested, what caused the `FileLoadError`, it can call its `source`
method and get its cause.

`source` should return `None` when the error is the root cause and doesn't wrap another error.
It's also impossible to return a wrapped error when it doesn't implement `Error`.

> ### The bevavior of `Display`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### The behavior of `Display`
```

Author: Fixed

The `Display` implementation should briefly describe the error.
It should never include information provided by the error returned from the `source`.

> Its output should be formatted as a single line, preferably a single sentence.

Author: ```suggestion
Its output should be formatted as a single line.
```

> If it's a single sentence, it should start with a lowercase letter and end with no interpunction.

Reviewer 2: I'd like to see some explanation as to why a single sentence is preferred, and also the reasons here.

Reviewer 3: Agree, seems personal preference to me

Author: The reasons were weak (preferring starting with lowercase and ending with no dot). Removed.

Reviewer 2: I still think these should be backed up with reasons. I'm not saying I don't agree with these. But they should read less as demands and provide some explanation as to why this is preferred. I think you explain this in the section on chaining errors so it would suffice to say that the reasons are explained there.

Author: I've added an explanation, that it's needed for printing chains.

Examples:

`failed to load the file '/tmp/file'` **good**

`failed to load the file '/tmp/file': file not found`
**bad**: includes information provided by its `source`

`Failed to load the file '/tmp/file'!`
**bad**: a single sentence starting with a capital letter and ending with interpunction

`Failed to load the file. Path: '/tmp/file'.`
**ugly**: it has two sentences

## Printing a chain of `Error`s

When all the errors in a chain behave correctly, insightful and well formatted messages can be
easily provided to the user.
The error can be iterated by recursively calling `source` to print each layer and provide the full
chain of errors that caused the failure.

> Due to strict `Display` implementation rules there's a lot of creative freedom when it comes to

Reviewer 3: What’s the rules? Seems pretty lawless to me. Or do you mean just the fact that an impl must exist.

Author: I've specified that it's about `rules outlined in the previous section`. Is it clear now?

chain formatting.
The `source` traverasal can be done manually, with `anyhow::Chain` or with very similar
`std::error::Chain` as soon as it's stabilized.

An example of the manual chain printing:

```rust
println!("An error occured: {}", error);
let mut parent = &error;
while let Some(cause) = parent.source() {
    println!("  caused by: {}", cause);
    parent = cause;
}
```

An example output:

```
An error occured: failed to load the configuration file
  caused by: failed to load the file '~/.app_config'

>   caused by: file not found

Reviewer 2: This is nice :ok_hand:

```

An example of the chain printing with `anyhow::Chain`:

```rust
print!("An error occured: {}", error);
anyhow::Chain::new(&error).for_each(|e| print!(": {}", e);
println!();
```

An example output:

```

> An error occured: failed to load the configuration file: failed to load the file '~/.app_config': file not found

Reviewer 2: Wait, why would we not use `println!` here?

Author: Because then we would get a multiline output. I wanted to show that the full error chain can be printed as a single line too, e.g. for a logger.

Reviewer 2: Ah ok. I'd suggest not mixing examples. I saw this as an example for the `anyhow::Chain` capability. I would maybe add another one before this comparing `anyhow::Chain` to the `Error::Chain` example. Then you show this one with a single line.

Reviewer 2: As another note here: I find the `:` punctuation here ugly on the single line :sweat_smile:

Author: I've added the third example for clarity and switched from `:` to `⮩` for that aesthetic feel. Is it good now?

```

# Recommendation

These examples of building errors serve as a practical guide.
There are some common patterns of error structures and all of them can be implemented conveniently
and correctly using `thiserror` and `anyhow`.

> All the examples use `enum`s, but it's fine to use `struct`s instead when there's only one variant.

Reviewer 2: The recommendation of `enum` and `struct` is already outlined in the previous error handling proposal. So I would just reference that and not elaborate here.

Author: These are just two sentences, do you think that it's worth referencing the other document? When it's here, it resolves any confusion in ~4 seconds of reading.

Reviewer 2: Fair point. I'm realising that it's actually the line below that alerted me: " Usually it's not very useful, because it reduces flexibility, but doesn't simplify code much." This relates to a recommendation that was already made in the previous proposal and I don't think adds anything here.

Do you agree?

Author: Removed

Usually it's not very useful, because it reduces flexibility, but doesn't simplify code much.

## Root cause errors

These are errors that don't wrap other errors inside.
They may contain multiple structures and a lot of details, but their `source` always returns `None`.

> A root error can be just a variant of a bigger error with other variants, some of which may be even

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A root cause error can be just a variant of a bigger error with other variants, some of which may be even
```

Author: Fixed

> A root error can be just a variant of a bigger error with other variants, some of which may be even

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this point. If it's a variant containing a bigger error then isn't the bigger error the cause for this variant in question?

Author: Hopefully fixed :)

wrappers.

### Statically typed root cause error

The error has a statically defined meaning and details.
It's easy to track it by humans and analyze it in the code.
It requires scrutiny and planning to design, but it's easy to reuse in different parts of the code.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("the file contains invalid value {0}")
    InvalidValue(u32),
    ...
}
```

### Textual root cause error

> The error is defined only as a text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The error is defined only as text.
```

Author: Fixed

> It may be harder to track by humans it and it's almost impossible to analyze in the code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may be harder to track by humans and it's almost impossible to analyze in the code.
```

Author: Fixed

It's much better to use `anyhow::Error`, because unlike `String` it implements
`std::error::Error` making its processing easier and more consistent.
The `anyhow` crate also provides the `anyhow!` macro, which works just like `format!`.

```rust
fn check_value(value: u32) -> Result<(), anyhow::Error> {
    ...
    .ok_or_else(|| anyhow::anyhow!("the file contains an unexpected value {}", value))?;
    ...
}
```

## Wrapper errors

These are errors that wrap other errors inside. Their `source` always returns the inner error.
A wrapper error can be just a variant of a bigger error with other variants, some of which may be
even roots.

### Statically typed wrapper error

The error has a statically defined cause and details.
It's easy to track it by humans and analyze it in the code.
It requires scrutiny and planning to design, but it's easy to reuse in different parts of the code.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("failed to open the file '{path}'")]
    FileSystemError {
        path: String,
        #[source]
        source: std::io::Error,
    },
    ...
}
```

> Sometimes it's necessary to wrap an error not as a source, but as another case of the wrapper.

Reviewer 2: I found the original sentence a bit confusing as to what you were describing, but the example made sense. Maybe you would prefer this wording or something like it :)

Suggested wording:
Sometimes we would like a variant to act like the error it contains. We delegate the `Error` implementation to the underlying error.

Author: Fixed with the help of your suggestion. Is it good now?

It's supported by `thiserror` in a form of the `transparent` annotation.
All the `std::error::Error` and `Display` calls are then passed directly to the internal error
effectively hiding the wrapper.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error(transparent)]
    Other(#[from] anyhow::Error)
    ...
}
```

### Statically typed wrapper error when source has multiple types

> The error with multiple causes expressed as different types.

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure what you're trying to express here. Maybe we could work on it together? Could you explain it in different words to me?

Author: You're right, it's kind of difficulty to decode when reading with a fresh mind. I've expanded it, is it better now?

Reviewer 2: I'm still not quite sure I understand the issue :/ Something that might help me, at least, is a before and after. So what one might think is possible (the before) and what we actually have to do (the after - which I think is the example you've already provided). Sorry if this is me just being slow to the uptake :smile:

Author: I've added a "before" example, with a dumb, but ugly workaround. Thank you for a solution! Is it clearer now?

It can be done statically and without obscuring the structure or affecting reusability.

> The solution is addition of another layer of the error, but with all its variants annotated as

Reviewer 3: How does this interact with automatic coercion via `?`?

Author: Good point, I've added a relevant section.

effectively hiding the additional layer.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("error while parsing the file")]
    ParseError(#[from] FileParseError),
    ...
}

#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
enum FileParseError {
    #[error(transparent)]
    Utf8Error(#[from] std::str::Utf8Error),
    #[error(transparent)]
    ParseIntError(#[from] std::num::ParseIntError),
}
```

### Dynamically typed wrapper error

The catch-all error wrapper of `anyhow::Error`, which can contain any cause.
It's flexible, but it obscures the structure of the errors.
It's easy to misuse and wrap a wrong error due to lack of the static type checking.
It should be generally avoided except for rare cases when static structure would be overly
complicated and the error is created, handled and discarded in a narrow scope.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("error while parsing the file")]
    ParseError(#[from] anyhow::Error),
    ...
}
```

# Drawbacks

There are 2 main reasons **not** to follow this convention:

1. Errors are handled too rarely to be worth any attention

> 2. Some crates in the ecosystem don't follow this convention, so at some depth the errors may still

Reviewer 2: Which crates don't follow this?

Author: Added

* Title: Structured error handling in Rust
* Champion: @CodeSandwich
* Conversation (optional): [thread on radicle.community](https://radicle.community/t/proposal-structured-error-handling-in-rust/179)
* References:

>   * [The previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md)

Reviewer 2: FYI: you can use anchor references. If you want to look at the previous proposal I used them. It means you don't have to repeat the link but instead, the anchor.

different errors coming from numerous crates.
It's not possible to enforce the exact behavior of an implementation of the `Error` trait, but
there's a widely used convention making it reasonably uniform and predictable.

## The correct behavior of an `Error` implementation

`Error` provides 2 core functionalities:

- it provides the `source` method, which may or may not return a reference to another
`std::error::Error`
- it derives from `Display` making all its implementors printable

### The behavior of `source`

`source` should return a value when the error has another error nested inside.
The wrapped error should be the cause of the outer one, usually a bit lower level and more detailed.
The errors can be wrapped multiple times to express the whole chain of errors down to the root
cause. It can be traversed by calling `source` recursively.

For example the custom `FileLoadError` can wrap the `std::io::Error`.
This way the file loading function doesn't have to know about all the possible file system failures
described by the `std::io::Error`.
When it gets one, it simply wraps it in the `FileLoadError` and returns it.

> If a higher level function is interested, what caused the `FileLoadError`, it can call its `source`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a higher-level function is interested in what caused the `FileLoadError`, it can call its `source`
```

Author: Fixed

`source` should return `None` when the error is the root cause and doesn't wrap another error.
It's also impossible to return a wrapped error when it doesn't implement `Error`.

### The behavior of `Display`

The `Display` implementation should briefly describe the error.
It should never include information provided by the error returned from the `source`.
Its output should be formatted as a single line.
If it's a single sentence, it should start with a lowercase letter and end with no interpunction.

Examples:

`failed to load the file '/tmp/file'` **good**

`failed to load the file '/tmp/file': file not found`
**bad**: includes information provided by its `source`

`Failed to load the file '/tmp/file'!`
**bad**: a single sentence starting with a capital letter and ending with interpunction

`Failed to load the file. Path: '/tmp/file'.`
**ugly**: it has two sentences

## Printing a chain of `Error`s

When all the errors in a chain behave correctly, insightful and well formatted messages can be
easily provided to the user.
The error can be iterated by recursively calling `source` to print each layer and provide the full
chain of errors that caused the failure.

> Due to strict `Display` implementation rules outlined in the previous section there's a lot of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to strict `Display` implementation rules outlined in the previous section, there's a lot of
```

creative freedom when it comes to chain formatting.

> The `source` traverasal can be done manually, with `anyhow::Chain` or with very similar

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `source` traversal can be done manually with the `anyhow::Chain` iterator or with the very similar iterator
```

Author: Fixed

`std::error::Chain` as soon as it's stabilized.

An example of printing the chain manually:

```rust
println!("An error occured: {}", error);
let mut parent = &error;
while let Some(cause) = parent.source() {
    println!("  caused by: {}", cause);
    parent = cause;
}
```

An example of printing the chain with `anyhow::Chain`:

```rust
println!("An error occured: {}", error);
for cause in anyhow::Chain::new(&error) {
    println!("  caused by: {}", cause);
}
```

Both examples have the same output:

```
An error occured: failed to load the configuration file
  caused by: failed to load the file '~/.app_config'
  caused by: file not found
```

> An example of printing the chain in a single line with `anyhow::Chain`:

Reviewer 2: I would mention that this example is useful for logging. That made it clear for me when you were explaining during the review :)

Author: Fixed

even roots.

### Statically typed wrapper error

The error has a statically defined cause and details.
It's easy to track it by humans and analyze it in the code.
It requires scrutiny and planning to design, but it's easy to reuse in different parts of the code.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("failed to open the file '{path}'")]
    FileSystemError {
        path: String,
        #[source]
        source: std::io::Error,
    },
    ...
}
```

Sometimes it's necessary to wrap an error not as a source, but as another case of the wrapper.
It's supported by `thiserror` in a form of the `transparent` annotation.
All the `std::error::Error` and `Display` calls are then passed directly to the internal error
effectively hiding the wrapper.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error(transparent)]
    Other(#[from] anyhow::Error)
    ...
}
```

### Statically typed wrapper error when source has multiple types

The error with multiple causes expressed as different types.
It can be done statically and without obscuring the structure or affecting reusability.

> The solution is addition of another layer of the error, but with all its variants annotated as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The solution is an addition of another layer of the error, but with all its variants annotated as
```

Author: Fixed

Author: Fixed

* Title: Structured error handling in Rust
* Champion: @CodeSandwich
* Conversation (optional): [thread on radicle.community](https://radicle.community/t/proposal-structured-error-handling-in-rust/179)
* References:
  * [The previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md)
  * [`std::error::Error`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/error/trait.Error.html)
  * [A discussion about the good design of errors](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/do-people-not-care-about-printable-error-chains-a-k-a-how-to-nicely-implement-display-for-an-error/35362)

> # Summary/Motivation/Introduction

Reviewer: Can we choose one? Intro seems appropriate.

Author: I didn't understand the template intention. Fixed.

> We need good error handling to make our lives easier.

Reviewer: This sentence feels like it's not quite there. First, we know that good error handling is a good thing, but what does it mean to make our lives easier? I'd prefer if you would describe what problems we have at the moment and how this proposal will fix or improve it.

Author: I'd prefer not to add this detail here. This is an internal technical proposal, not a published book about testing, we already know why error handling is important.

Reviewer: I agree with you, as you can see from my second sentence above.

We've already agreed to use `thiserror` and `anyhow` in the
[previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md).
They are fantastic tools, but we're still lacking a common design language.
There are many ways to create an error and some of them don't play well with others.

> Without common conventions handling errors is problematic too.

Reviewer: It seems like these sentences were meant to be "bullet points"? They are all in different lines but when parsed they are all inlined.

Author: That's intended. It's easier to work on a document cleanly split into sentences and lines at the same time.

## The correct behavior of an `Error` implementation

`Error` provides 2 core functionalities:

- it provides the `source` method, which may or may not return a reference to another
`std::error::Error`
- it derives from `Display` making all its implementors printable

### The behavior of `source`

`source` should return a value when the error has another error nested inside.
The wrapped error should be the cause of the outer one, usually a bit lower level and more detailed.
The errors can be wrapped multiple times to express the whole chain of errors down to the root
cause. It can be traversed by calling `source` recursively.

For example the custom `FileLoadError` can wrap the `std::io::Error`.
This way the file loading function doesn't have to know about all the possible file system failures
described by the `std::io::Error`.
When it gets one, it simply wraps it in the `FileLoadError` and returns it.
If a higher-level function is interested in what caused the `FileLoadError`, it can call its `source`
method and get its cause.

`source` should return `None` when the error is the root cause and doesn't wrap another error.

> It's also impossible to return a wrapped error when it doesn't implement `Error`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All wrapped errors are also implementations of `Error`.
```

Author: But this is not true, the causality is reversed.

### The behavior of `Display`

The `Display` implementation should briefly describe the error.
It should never include information provided by the error returned from the `source`.
Its output should be formatted as a single line.
If it's a single sentence, it should start with a lowercase letter and end with no interpunction.

> These rules make it easy to print the whole chain of errors as described in the next section.

Reviewer: These also seem like they'd better be formatted as bullet points.

Author: That's not the intention here either.

Examples:

> `failed to load the file '/tmp/file'` **good**
> 
> `failed to load the file '/tmp/file': file not found` **bad**:
> includes information provided by its `source`
> 
> `Failed to load the file '/tmp/file'!` **bad**:
> a single sentence starting with a capital letter and ending with interpunction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
✔️ `failed to load the file '/tmp/file'`

❌ `failed to load the file '/tmp/file': file not found`
reason: includes information provided by its `source`_

❌ `Failed to load the file '/tmp/file'!`
reason: starts with a capital letter and ends with interpunction
```

Author: Fixed, except for the last `reason`, it's important that it's a single sentence.

## Printing a chain of `Error`s

When all the errors in a chain behave correctly, insightful and well formatted messages can be
easily provided to the user.
The error can be iterated by recursively calling `source` to print each layer and provide the full
chain of errors that caused the failure.
Due to strict `Display` implementation rules outlined in the previous section, there's a lot of
creative freedom when it comes to chain formatting.
The `source` traversal can be done manually with the `anyhow::Chain` iterator or with the

> very similar iterator `std::error::Chain` as soon as it's stabilized.

Reviewer: Also seem better like bullet points

Author: That's not the intention here either.

```rust
println!("An error occured: {}", error);
for cause in anyhow::Chain::new(&error) {
    println!("  caused by: {}", cause);
}
```

Both examples have the same output:

```
An error occured: failed to load the configuration file
  caused by: failed to load the file '~/.app_config'
  caused by: file not found
```

An example of printing the chain in a single line with `anyhow::Chain`:

```rust
print!("An error occured: {}", error);
anyhow::Chain::new(&error).for_each(|e| print!(" ⮩ {}", e);
println!();
```

An example output:

```
An error occured: failed to load the configuration file ⮩ failed to load the file '~/.app_config' ⮩ file not found
```

# Recommendation

These examples of building errors serve as a practical guide.
There are some common patterns of error structures and all of them can be implemented conveniently
and correctly using `thiserror` and `anyhow`.

All the examples use `enum`s, but it's fine to use `struct`s instead when there's only one variant.
Usually it's not very useful, because it reduces flexibility, but doesn't simplify code much.

## Root cause errors

These are errors that don't wrap other errors inside.

> They may contain multiple structures and a lot of details, but their `source` always returns `None`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They may contain multiple structures and a lot of details, but they have no `source`.
```

Author: This would obscure their observed behavior, which is returning a specific value.

A wrapper error can be just a variant of a bigger error with other variants, some of which may be
even roots.

### Statically typed wrapper error

The error has a statically defined cause and details.
It's easy to track it by humans and analyze it in the code.
It requires scrutiny and planning to design, but it's easy to reuse in different parts of the code.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("failed to open the file '{path}'")]
    FileSystemError {
        path: String,
        #[source]
        source: std::io::Error,
    },
    ...
}
```

Sometimes you may want a variant to act like the error it contains.
It's supported by `thiserror` in a form of the `transparent` annotation.
All the `std::error::Error` and `Display` calls are then passed directly to the internal error
effectively hiding the wrapper.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error(transparent)]
    Other(#[from] anyhow::Error)
    ...
}
```

### Statically typed wrapper error when source has multiple types

A single error may have multiple possible causes. Sometimes these causes may have different types.

> When that's the case, the regular wrapping described in the previous section won't work, becaus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When that's the case, the regular wrapping described in the previous section won't work, because
```

Author: Fixed

        FileParseError::from(error).into()
    }
}
```

Or with a blanket implementation:

```rust
impl <T: Into<FileParseError>> From<T> for FileLoadError {
    fn from(error: T) -> Self {
        error.into().into()
    }
}
```

### Dynamically typed wrapper error

The catch-all error wrapper of `anyhow::Error`, which can contain any cause.
It's flexible, but it obscures the structure of the errors.
It's easy to misuse and wrap a wrong error due to lack of the static type checking.
It should be generally avoided except for rare cases when static structure would be overly
complicated and the error is created, handled and discarded in a narrow scope.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("error while parsing the file")]
    ParseError(#[from] anyhow::Error),
    ...
}
```

# Drawbacks

There are 2 main reasons **not** to follow this convention:

1. Errors are handled too rarely to be worth any attention
2. Some crates in the ecosystem don't follow this convention, so at some depth the errors may still
return to being poorly structured and formatted

# Open Questions

None.

# Future possibilities

> It will be easier to put a full error into a line of a log.

Reviewer: How do you mean this?

Author: Fixed

A wrapper error can be just a variant of a bigger error with other variants, some of which may be
even roots.

### Statically typed wrapper error

The error has a statically defined cause and details.
It's easy to track it by humans and analyze it in the code.
It requires scrutiny and planning to design, but it's easy to reuse in different parts of the code.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("failed to open the file '{path}'")]
    FileSystemError {
        path: String,
        #[source]
        source: std::io::Error,
    },
    ...
}
```

Sometimes you may want a variant to act like the error it contains.
It's supported by `thiserror` in a form of the `transparent` annotation.
All the `std::error::Error` and `Display` calls are then passed directly to the internal error
effectively hiding the wrapper.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error(transparent)]
    Other(#[from] anyhow::Error)
    ...
}
```

### Statically typed wrapper error when source has multiple types

A single error may have multiple possible causes. Sometimes these causes may have different types.

> When that's the case, the regular wrapping described in previous section won't work, because each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When that's the case, the regular wrapping described in the previous section won't work, because each
```

Author: Fixed
